Cardiff Carnival 25th Anniversary Project.
Interviewer Steve Fletcher.
Interviewee Tony Charles.
The location of the interview is the Swicker office
and today's date is the 13th of October 2015.
Before we start Tony, would you be kind enough for the record
to spell your name in full please?
Okay, so it's Tony.
T-O-N-Y
and Charles
C-H-A-R-L-E-S.
Tony Charles.
Thank you very much indeed.
Tony, tell us how did you first become involved in Cardiff Carnival?
It goes back a long way actually because it goes back to the 1970s
when we had the Lord Mayor's Parade
which was a very different type of carnival to what we see in more recent years in Cardiff.
And that came about as a result of a small group of us
started the South Wales Talking Magazine Association for the Blind in 1971
and we were partly charged with capturing the sights and sounds of South Wales
for the blind and partially sighted as part of our objective.
And so things like that going on were very important and popular at the time.
And what I remember about the Lord Mayor's Parade was
it was much more commercial in those days.
I suppose businesses were putting more money into things like this
and had greater publicity budgets.
And so you had floats, lorries, flatbed lorries.
It was very much motorised wasn't it?
Yes and you know you had people on lorries, on the back of lorries,
commercial lorries, the businesses promoting their names through their logos on their lorries.
And also the other thing was we had the military tattoo in those days
and the military bands participated in the Lord Mayor's Parade.
So that was the beginning and I guess from those early days
my interest in carnival developed.
That's fantastic and of course along comes 1990
and Swicker starts the furthest ever Cardiff Mars Carnival
coming from a very different place from the junior Chamber of Trade
who used to organise the Lord Mayor's Parade.
I mean first and foremost everything was at a human level
so we deliberately went for the non-motorised,
being closer to our audience type feel as it were.
So you've seen...
Yes it's been quite a bit of change.
There's been a lot of change and are you able to tell us roughly when you first
started taking photographs of Cardiff Carnival?
I think I took photographs from very much the early days.
I mean I've been taking photographs since I was eight years old which is a very long time ago
and it's always been for me an audio visual event, audio for reportage for the
South Wales Talking Magazine for the Blind, our monthly sound magazine
and photography being my hobby and the remarkable thing for me was and quite
astonishing was that in the late 70s doing the audio side I won a national tape recording
award for a documentary tape on the Lord Mayor's Parade
and so it was very much for me audio in the early days but then
photography I think developed.
What I find interesting is if you try and do them both at the same time
on that day it gets a bit challenging because you're juggling your visual skills and then
you know you're trying to interview people and record material but it has changed a lot and
from that more commercial motorised approach and military approach we saw then particularly then as
Swicker Carnival emerged all those years ago you saw it become much closer to the public as you
say and more of a voluntary sector movement which I think has been fantastic for the community of
Cardiff both the viewers and the participants.
Of course Carnival is a democratic art form we like to talk about its powers of transformation
and in terms of art it's time-based art I mean because
and for that reason it's beautiful it's flamboyant it's of the moment but if it isn't captured on
film or still if it isn't documented then it's lost to future generations and so
I think we first met when I made contact with you as part of Cardiff Camera Club.
That's right.
Because we thought that first of all very cost effective second of all we've got the ultimate
subject and there's something about meeting you and hearing you talk about the membership and the
activities that made me realise that you know we're all part of the same thing here and it was
highly appropriate to actually have the Camera Club shooting the Carnival this seems quite natural
yes what was it like getting the idea I mean I know you've been wonderful in sort of
asking as an interface between our two organisations I know you're grinning at the moment so yes
okay how did that all come about how easy was it to to to inspire the
the members to come out and and to shoot us en masse as it were I think it was a change in the
same way that the carnival has been through change uh Cardiff Camera Club has been through change I
mean traditionally it was very much a club where you went along one night a week sat down maybe
had a lecture or maybe a monthly competition or something like that and then you went home
and I think what tended to to to change things was that that the club started to become much more
involved with the community and my job as honorary press officer was not only to sort of liaise with
the media and raise the profile of the club but also to try and think about how we could work more
with community organisations and that had a you know a two-way street situation a win-win situation
because on the one hand it was giving amateur photographers a chance to do some good photography
hopefully giving them the the opportunity to shoot some interesting things but also then in
terms of the organisations the voluntary groups giving them some material that would help them
with their publicity no no and that's very true I mean one of the things I loved about yourself
and the Cardiff Camera Club is the quick turnaround I mean you know so we would do
carnival normally on a Saturday by Monday we would begin to have a flow of images
and certainly that would help beat the post-carnival blues where suddenly you've been
through this experience and and you know bless them there's suddenly there's these discs arriving in
our pigeonhole in chapter and we're reliving the highlights of the weekend and so you know that was
one of the many things I enjoyed working with the Cardiff Camera Club. And the thing with amateur
photography is that you know you're not doing it commercially for a client where the client is
dictating what they need for example a wedding is a typical example you've got to give the married
couple what they want. I think with amateur photography it can become much more of an art
because you have that freedom to do it how you like and I mean what I've seen each year about a
dozen members of the club shoot the carnival from beginners to very experienced members some have
worked commercially as well as professionals in the past but what I see is a range of different
approaches by those people so you've got people with different styles and for me what that gives
Swick a carnival is a spectrum of artistic output as opposed to perhaps one commercial photographer
doing a shoot in his particular style. Yes you might have one somebody's into portraiture
someone else is going for the crowd shots yeah and uh there was a you know obviously shooting in the
urban environment where we're parading through the streets of Cardiff I know that you and others
have found various vantage points but we still think uh that there's well there was a shot which
is known as Tony's shot uh and this is where you uh yeah what's it like from the keep of the castle
looking down St Mary's street at hundreds of costumes because it was it was a brainwave you
know we couldn't get you up in a helicopter you know you're too big for a drone I can't use a
drone no I think it was really probably going back to my commercial business background in the
second half of my career and you think you know you're a charity you're after sponsorship you're
after money and so what would somebody putting money into a carnival want they want the context
with when and it's not a couple of people on the pavement in church away Cardiff looking at a few
people going past it's thousands of people uh for example looking up from the top of Cardiff castle
entrance up St Mary's street uh High Street St Mary's street seeing you know the thousands of
people jammed you know up against the the the shop windows right up to the barriers the pavement
and then the carnival with lots of people in different groups coming down so that was almost
a helicopter view and then of course you've got the up close um and personal um context as well
where you're looking at people in groups or individually which again with the colour
and costumes that so much thought and design goes into into them with your crew
it gives a very different visual experience but what I've also seen is something that's quite
different and probably people don't acknowledge or don't see as one of the other benefits side
effects of Cardiff carnival and I've talked to a lot of people in the carnival over the years
they say don't click uh with your camera until you've clicked with the person you know so talk
to the person yeah yeah I talked to a lot of people over the years you know because if you're going to
shoot them you want to know a little bit about them perhaps and what I found is I've had people
say to me I came into this as a volunteer and did this and it changed my life um I was down um I'd
been through a bad experience something had happened in my life and by joining the Cardiff
carnival team going to the workshops and taking part in the preparation and being with those other
people actually got me back on my feet and I've heard people say that sort of thing now most
people watching the carnival wouldn't realize but there are all sorts of if you like tangents
undercurrents going on within the carnival that I think too is is is absolutely fantastic in terms
of what the carnival does for Cardiff and individual people I think that's fantastic I mean I think
your reference to the the healing power of of creating things collectively and then twice
bless showing it in the in the public domain and adding a bit of color to our austerity struck
streets streets it's uh it's it's fantastic um well uh obviously uh this interview will form
part of the archive as will hundreds of thousands of photographs many of which you personally helped
us bring about through the relationship with the Cardiff camera club and we're very very grateful
for that uh obviously we sit here slightly saddened by the news that of course swicker carnival
with withdrawal of arts council funding will now be closing um what what are your what are your
thoughts on that I mean uh I'm very sad about that because uh being part of the welsh charity
movement myself as a founder member and a volunteer for 44 years with the south wales talking
magazine association first of all I realize how important it is for voluntary and not-for-profit
groups to get funding these days so that is an issue in these times of difficulty and yet we're
one of the richest countries in the world so there's a you know a bit of a dilemma there in terms of
you think well what's going on now Cardiff is a very modern expanding progressive european capital
the foundations were laid through the wisdom of the city forefathers and we've got to continue that
I mean over the last five years I've traveled quite extensively uh particularly in europe and
abroad to cities like uh Rio in Brazil um Accra in Senegal a lot of the european cities Lisbon
Barcelona places like that and if somebody said to me Tony where would you prefer to be it would
always be Cardiff we're a modern european waterfront city and we have to invest in the
arts we have to invest in the future and I'm very sad when I hear of arts and voluntary
organizations having these financial difficulties which seem to come up so often these days so I
would very much like to see some sort of rebirth some phoenix from the ashes come out of 26 years
of Cardiff carnival and see something continue in the future as we continue to try and develop
Cardiff as a leading european city on that hopeful and optimistic note can I just say
Tony it's been a joy working with you over the years and I wish to award you the invisible but
eternal accolade of a hereby W a Cardiff carnival hero thank you very much Tony thank you